Latest 5.15.0 RNs.mdx (#2702)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: developer-support/release-notes/gateway.mdx

---

## 5.15 Release Notes 

### 5.15.0 Release Notes 

#### Release Date xx August 2026

#### Release Highlights

**Create MCP Proxies from Your Existing REST APIs**

Tyk Gateway can now turn an existing Tyk OAS API into a fully functional MCP proxy, so REST APIs already registered with Tyk can be exposed to AI agents as MCP tools without rebuilding them. This release adds the catalogue and configuration foundation for defining MCP proxies, REST-to-MCP protocol translation for tool calls, session lifecycle and Gateway runtime support, and policy enforcement over MCP proxy traffic.

> **Flexible configuration with a unified Key-Value reference syntax**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Enhanced Secrets Management**
```

> This release also introduces a single, unified way to reference secrets and configuration values from an external store anywhere in an API definition: `kv://<store>/<path>` for a whole value, or `$kv{<store>:<path>}` inline within a string. The store itself — Vault, Consul, a plain environment variable, or a generic secrets provider — is defined once, by name, in a new Key-Value registry in the Gateway configuration. Existing `vault://`, `consul://`, `env://`, and `secrets://` references keep working unchanged, so there's no forced migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release also introduces an enhanced Secrets Management approach, replacing the legacy Key-Value reference syntax for most use cases.

Secrets declared in the Tyk config file, environment variables, local files (including Kubernetes-mounted secrets), Hashicorp Vault and Hashicorp Consul continue to be supported for all users.

For Enterprise Edition users, the new system adds support for new providers: AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, and GCP Secret Manager.

Multiple instances of the same store can be registered and there is full support for retrieval of individual fields from JSON objects in the stores.

Existing key-value references keep working unchanged, so there's no forced migration.
```

**Microsoft Entra On-Behalf-Of Support for Token Exchange**

RFC 8693 Token Exchange now supports the Microsoft Entra On-Behalf-Of (OBO) grant, allowing Tyk Gateway to exchange an inbound client token for a downstream-scoped token issued by Microsoft Entra ID before forwarding the request upstream.
Token Exchange also gains improved observability into the exchange process (Enterprise Edition).

> **A modernized JavaScript plugin engine**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**New JavaScript plugin engine**
```

> Tyk Gateway's JavaScript plugin engine now offers a new `goja`-based driver as an opt-in alternative to the existing `otto` engine, improving performance and adding support for post-auth and response hooks in JS plugins. The `otto` driver remains the default, so existing JS plugins are unaffected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've added a new JavaScript plugin engine that uses the Goja Golang JavaScript runtime. This is available as a new `driver` option and provides significant improvement in JS plugin performance. We've also extended the usability of JS plugins so that they can be assigned to all plugin hooks. 
```

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 
 **Next-generation (-ng) plugin compiler with native arm64 support**
 
A new next-generation (`-ng`) plugin compiler is now available, as an alternative to the existing compiler, with a significantly reduced the OS-level CVE surface compared to the current compiler.

This compiler adds native `linux/arm64` support. Plugins built on Apple Silicon or other arm64 hosts no longer need to run the compiler under emulation.

```

> This release also adds GCP IAM-based authentication to Redis/Valkey for Google Cloud Memorystore deployments, ships the next-generation (`-ng`) plugin compiler with native arm64 support, updates the Go toolchain to Go 1.26, and includes a set of smaller fixes covering request validation, GraphQL Playground, JWT logging, session deletion under load, and shutdown log formatting. This release also addresses several CVEs in dependent libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**IAM-based authentication for Google Cloud Memorystore**

Tyk Dashboard now supports IAM-based authentication for Google Cloud Memorystore for Redis Cluster and Valkey, as an alternative to a static password.
```

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.15.0) below.

#### Breaking Changes

> There are no breaking changes in this release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release moves to Go 1.26, please ensure that your custom Go plugins are rebuilt for compatibility. 
```

</Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Added support for MCP proxies in Tyk Gateway'>
{/* TT-17319, TT-17588, TT-17320, TT-17321, TT-17322 */}
Tyk Gateway now supports exposing Tyk OAS APIs as MCP proxies, giving AI agents a standard way to discover and call an API's functionality:

- Tyk OAS APIs can be configured as MCP proxies, giving each API a catalogue entry and configuration foundation that describes it as a set of MCP tools, resources, and prompts.
- When an agent calls an MCP tool, Gateway translates the JSON-RPC tool call into the equivalent REST request against the underlying API, and translates the REST response back into the MCP response format the agent expects.
- Gateway manages the full MCP session lifecycle — initialization, keep-alive, and teardown — as part of its runtime request handling.
- Access policies can be enforced against MCP proxy traffic, so the same policy-based access controls used for REST APIs apply consistently to the MCP tools, resources, and prompts an MCP proxy exposes.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Added a unified `kv://` syntax for referencing secrets and configuration values'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Enhanced Secrets Management'>
```

{/* TT-16268, TT-17102, TT-17623, TT-17697, TT-17698, TT-17702 */}

> Tyk now supports a single, unified syntax for referencing secrets and configuration values held in an external store, anywhere a value can appear in an API definition: `kv://<store-name>/<path>` to substitute a whole value, or `$kv{<store-name>:<path>}` to substitute a value inline within a string. The store referenced by `<store-name>` — Vault, Consul, a plain environment variable, or a generic secrets provider — is declared once in a new Key-Value registry in the Gateway configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release introduces a new, enhanced Secrets Management solution, introducing a new streamlined and more flexible syntax for referencing external secrets stores from the Tyk Gateway configuration and API definitions.

For Enterprise Edition users, we are introducing support for AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, and Google Cloud Secret Manager.

```

> Existing provider-specific references (`vault://`, `consul://`, `env://`, `secrets://`, and the `$secret_<provider>.<key>` inline form) continue to work exactly as before, so no existing API definition needs to change. The new syntax is purely additive, giving you one consistent way to reference configuration values going forward regardless of which store they come from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Register as many different `stores` as required and then access data stored in them, including from stored JSON objects using a consistent syntax:

 - `kv://<store>/<path>[#fragment]` for whole-value references.
 - `$kv{<store>:<path>[#fragment]}` for embedding a reference inside a larger string.
 - 
 
The secrets management configuration block (`kv`) can itself contain references, for example pulling a Vault token from an environment variable.

References are resolved once, at startup. Individual secrets stores can be marked as `required` and, if they cannot be reached or initialized, Gateway will fail to start - with a clear error - rather than starting with that store silently unavailable.
 
The legacy Key-Value solution continues to work exactly as before, so no existing API definition needs to change.

See [Secrets Management](/tyk-configuration-reference/kv-store) for full details.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Added Microsoft Entra On-Behalf-Of support to Token Exchange'>
{/* TT-17580 */}

RFC 8693 Token Exchange now supports the Microsoft Entra On-Behalf-Of (OBO) grant as a token exchange provider, allowing Tyk Gateway to exchange an inbound token for one scoped to a downstream Microsoft Entra ID-protected resource.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Added observability for Token Exchange'>
{/* TT-17186 */}

Token Exchange now emits additional observability data covering exchange attempts, giving operators visibility into token exchange activity and failures.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Next-generation (-ng) plugin compiler with native arm64 support'>
{/* TT-9550, TT-17641 */}

> A new next-generation (`-ng`) plugin compiler is now available alongside the existing plugin compiler, as an opt-in parallel option. It is a dual-layer, BusyBox-based image that significantly reduces the OS-level CVE surface compared to the current compiler, and adds native `linux/arm64` support — plugins built on Apple Silicon or other arm64 hosts no longer need to run the compiler under emulation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new next-generation (`-ng`) plugin compiler is now available, as an alternative to the existing compiler.

This image significantly reduces the OS-level CVE surface compared to the current compiler, and adds native `linux/arm64` support. Plugins built on Apple Silicon or other arm64 hosts no longer need to run the compiler under emulation.

```

> CE, EE, and FIPS variants are available under the `-ng` tag suffix for both feature and LTS releases, giving you a safe path to evaluate the new compiler before any eventual replacement of the current one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CE, EE, and FIPS variants are available with the `-ng` tag suffix.

For more details see [Golang Plugin Compiler](/api-management/plugins/golang#plugin-compiler).
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Added bundling support for custom analytics plugins'>
{/* TT-6176 */}
Custom analytics plugins (Go plugins that modify analytics records before they leave the Gateway) can now be packaged and distributed as part of a plugin bundle, instead of requiring a separate file path on every Gateway. Add a `traffic_logs` section under `custom_middleware` in the plugin bundle manifest to include an analytics plugin alongside your other custom middleware. Loading an analytics plugin from a direct file path continues to work as before.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Added a new goja-based driver for JavaScript plugins'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Enhancements to custom JavaScript plugins'>
```

{/* TT-16948, TT-17761 */}

> Tyk Gateway's JavaScript plugin engine now offers a `goja`-based driver as an opt-in alternative to the existing `otto` engine, improving performance and adding support for post-auth and response hooks in JS plugins — hook points the `otto` driver does not support. The `otto` driver remains the default, so existing JS plugins keep working unchanged; the new driver can be selected per API, including from the plugin driver dropdown in the Tyk OAS API designer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new Goja-based JavaScript plugin engine is available by selecting the `javascript` driver, significantly improving performance.

JavaScript plugins can also now be attached to post-auth and response hooks increasing the viability of JS as the plugin language of choice.

The existing `otto` driver remains available, so existing API definitions will be unaffected by these changes.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Added GCP IAM authentication for Redis/Valkey'>
{/* TT-17611 */}

> Tyk Gateway can now authenticate to Google Cloud Memorystore for Redis/Valkey using GCP IAM-based authentication, as an alternative to a static Redis password. This is supported for Memorystore for Valkey and for Memorystore for Redis Cluster; legacy non-cluster Memorystore for Redis has no IAM support from Google and continues to use a static password. The new authentication method is opt-in via configuration and is fully backward compatible with existing static-password setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk Gateway can now authenticate to Google Cloud Memorystore for Redis/Valkey using GCP IAM-based authentication, as an alternative to a static Redis password.

The Gateway obtains a Google OAuth2 access token from the workload's identity, using Application Default Credentials (ADC) and authenticates with the Memorystore using this token.

This is supported for use with Memorystore for Valkey and Memorystore for Redis Cluster. The legacy non-cluster Memorystore for Redis has no IAM support from Google and continues to use a static password.

The IAM configuration is set in the new `iam_auth` section of Gateway's storage config.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed inability to delete a Session using a quota under heavy load'>
{/* TT-16259 */}
We have resolved a race condition between session update and session deletion operations that, under heavy load, could either prevent a session (API key) with an associated quota from being deleted, or leave it appearing deleted on the Control Plane while still valid on the Data Plane. Session deletion now completes reliably under load, and deleted sessions are immediately invalidated across both planes.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed shutdown signal log entry not following the configured log format'>
{/* TT-17316 */}
We have resolved an issue where the log entry produced when the Gateway received a `SIGINT`, `SIGTERM`, or `SIGQUIT` shutdown signal did not follow the configured `log_format`. With JSON logging enabled, this unstructured entry could cause downstream log parsers to fail on an unparseable line. The shutdown signal is now logged in the configured format like any other application log entry.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed duplicate upstream token requests and log noise in Upstream OAuth'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Select client authentication method when requesting token from upstream OAuth authorization server'>
```

This is not a bug, please move to the Add section

{/* TT-16039 */}

> We've resolved an issue in Upstream OAuth, where Tyk acts as the OAuth client to an upstream identity provider, that sent a redundant, always-failing token request when the identity provider required client credentials in the request body rather than in a header. This removed the extra round trip and the associated log noise generated every time an upstream token was obtained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When requesting an OAuth token to use in Upstream OAuth, Tyk follows RFC 6749 in presenting the client credentials first in the request header and, if this fails, in the request body.

If the OAuth authorization server explicitly requires the credentials in the request body, this will mean that the first request will always fail.

We have added the ability to choose the client authentication method that Tyk should use when requesting the token with the new `method` field in the Upstream Authentication config:

- `client_secret_basic` will send the credentials only in the request header
- `client_secret_post` will send the credentials only in the request body
- if unset, the existing behavior will be followed, where Tyk will try header and then body
```
